Important, uh, for us as a committee,
and I'm sure for the crown itself, is
that we're doing everything we can
to make sure we meet the commitments
that we've signed ourselves up to in law with regards
to treaty settlements.
Um, so with that, um, obviously the document that,
that we have as a primary focus is obviously the, uh, audit,
the general's report, and it's got a number
of recommendations, uh, within that.
But perhaps to start this, this hearing,
and I, I want this to be more of a discussion that's,
I think that's the most helpful one of us getting
to the best outcome, um, with regards to this.
But you can, how about when you spend a bit of time opening,
uh, with some, some commentary about, uh,
where you see the organized organization's at,
it's your successes and your challenges itself.
So, no.
Um, thank you for your invitation, uh, for to appear
before you this morning, um, to respond
to the treaty settlement commitments, uh, report
and recommendations.
We do have a sort of a, some opening comments
and, uh, that will probably take 10 to 15 minutes on.
Okay. Um, so I'm gonna start
with some introductory comments.
Uh, this is a crucial in central COPA for TE Dock, uh,
as the holder of the largest number
of treaty settlement commitments.
And we remain committed to working with our treaty partners
and continuing to improve our implementation,
our partnerships, and our relationships with Iwi and Hapu
and PSGs across the MuTu, uh, course Sharon and Smith.
Uh, I am the Deputy Director General for,
uh, treaty relationships.
I'm also,
um, I have been in this role for five weeks, uh,
and so I'm grateful to be here, but I'm grateful, right.
I'm more grateful, uh, do have my Leonard colleagues here
with me who've been with the department for much longer,
so I'll just let them introduce themselves.
Uh, so morning, um, called Peter Galvin.
Uh, and I'm currently in the role
of the Deputy Director General Policy, though my, uh,
substantive role is as the director
of treaty negotiations and land.
So I, I had a responsibility for doing work, uh, across
how DOC manages its end-to-end responsibilities
around the treaty settlement system, which sort of included
by implication the commitments that are generated and,
and how we manage kilda.
Sure. Oh,
Everybody. My name is
Forbes.
For the past year, I have been responsible
for monitoring settlement implementation.
Yeah. And just to address the comments about my, um,
I did, I've met a few of you, uh, in one
of my previous roles at, whereas the, uh,
deputy Chief Executive for partnership,
so this is an entirely a new copa.
Um, but I'm gonna carry on with some introductory comments
and if I'll refer to the slides, um,
as we go along, if that's okay.
Uh, so I thought I would start with a bit
of context about TE Dock.
Uh, we manage the public conservation estate on behalf
of the Crown and all New Zealanders,
and that is about a third of the land area
of RO in New Zealand.
Uh, as you would expect, land
and UA is at the heart of breaches and treaty settlements,
and it is natural that we as the key agency
managing land on behalf of the Crown hold a large portfolio
of the settlement commitments.
Our commitment portfolio is complex.
It comprises both one-off as well as enduring commitments,
uh, cultural and relationship redress, financial
and commercial redress regulatory commitments,
and some custom redress as well.
Uh, we recognize that our ability to, uh,
deliver the redress is affected by a number of issues,
and this includes our own capacity
and capability, the readiness of treaty partners
to receive redress or trigger it, um,
and treaty partners competing priorities.
We are not the only game in town, um,
and delivery issues may affect a treaty partners capacity,
and we are keen to be, to understand those delivery issues.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and across the border public sector
that may be affecting, uh, our partners
and their ability to engage.
And that relates to one of the
O'S recommendations about the system, uh, on slide three,
which is the infographic.
Um, so this summarizes our various commitment types
and the relative status.
Uh, and this is an example
of the enhanced reporting the OAG has recommended,
and it details the types of commitments we have.
Um, so overall, we hold nearly three
and a half thousand commitments.
33% of these are complete,
and a further 50%, 57% are on track.
We do have eight commitments with a status
of delivery issues, uh, which is about
0.2%.
Um, the balance of our commitments are either not
yet triggered, for example, rights of first refusal
or not yet entered into the database.
All of our delivery issues are, sorry,
What, what, what does that mean?
Not enter into the
database? What do you mean by that? Sorry.
That we, So as the new settlements come online,
then we, we go in and manually we put in the, um, our, our,
So that would be relatively new settlements.
That's right. That, thank you. Yeah,
Thank you.
Uh, um, all of our delivery issues are relationship redress
or participation arrangements for the management
of natural resources.
Uh, we are, and Peter are going to give us some examples,
but Doc does not hold any commercial
or financial commitments with the status of delivery issues.
And we prioritize, uh, making sure that those are done.
But we or Peter some examples.
Oh, yeah. Or just to also talk to the fact that,
so while we've got 3,500 commitments,
those are very high level statements
and there's actually quite a bit of work
that goes on underneath them.
So when we are monitoring as a department, we, we are, um,
breaking those commitments down into a series of tasks
that then get assigned out across the different teams,
across, uh, the department that have
to progress those tasks.
And that is, you know, quite a broad range
of bits of the department.
It spans my area, um, in the land management, um,
there's some legal things that happen.
There are, um, statutory planning documents that have
to be progressed, and then there's a lot of on the ground,
uh, relationship management work that that can happen.
So there, there's, there's a lot of effort that goes in
underneath the, the three, the headline number of 3,500.
If you broke it down, I think we did an exercise
where it was like 15,000 actual individual tasks that sort
of make up delivering on those three
and a half thousand commitments.
Can I just ask the question?
I mean, the record, if you look at the percentages, uh,
the what's at risk and all that sort
of thing is actually a pretty good position to be in.
I, I'm, it's, it's not perfect,
but it's, it's, it's pretty good.
Is that a recent outcome
or has that been your basic, your, your,
your trend throughout?
Like, like has it just been a recent catch up recently
where, what's the journey of do in this space? Yes.
Prior to Teta coming in, into play? Yeah.
We actually, it would be very hard for us to tell you that
because the, the settlements are implement
implemented regionally.
Yes. And the regions each hit their
own records of where they're at.
And, and so, so this is my longwinded wave
of saying we are not entirely sure, but once hire came in
and we had to set up a system for in, you know, um,
entering, entering the status of them all, um, it's,
so I think that's something that we'll be able
to definitely tell, um, as we look at the long term. You
Know, the reason why I ask it is, um, you know, you,
you are the entity that's got by far, um,
the biggest workload when it comes to this.
And it's important that we gather the, uh, uh, strengths of
what you are doing to be able to cross-contaminate for want
of a better term, into other parts of, of the crown
of the government, because we do have areas that we're,
we're struggling and we're not, not quite there.
So it's almost like, uh, it's, um, we, we need
to grab the gems from you as well
and see whether it is fit for purpose
to place somewhere else to learn from it.
And maybe a question, is there, what is the interaction,
the communication between DOC
and other government entities
to help each other out on this journey, which is
so important to the, to the crown, to the government itself.
So I wonder about the end to end.
Yeah, yeah. Bit in that. Yeah.
Well, so there was quite a, um, significant
and relatively sustained effort ahead
of the first reporting period on to HIA to make, you know,
to actually sort out
where we actually stood in respect of our commitment.
So I think that's, uh, you know, it does require
some concentrated
and sustained effort to make sure that your systems are,
you know, actually capturing the information they need to.
I think what, what out of that exercise, the sense I got was
that in individual teams were being, you know,
given the responsibility to implement commitments
and do all those tasks,
and they were largely getting through that work.
Um, the thing that we didn't really have was a way
of pulling their information together readily.
So one of the key things we did was to create a, a kind
of a dashboard, if you will, which set
above all the individual information management systems
that was capturing effort against tasks
and be able to collate it up
so we could then talk about overall
performance as a department.
So, um, I've, so to the other question too about the degree
to which we talk, I mean, we, we talk a lot with Lins, um,
because we have such a close interface
around land management and all,
and I, so I've been talking to my counterpart there
and I understand that they've actually put a lot
of effort in recently around doing something very similar.
In fact, like trying to figure out, create dashboards
that allow 'em to monitor, um,
effort across the individual parts of their department, um,
that would then be able to allow us
to report in a more coordinated way on that.
That's the one I'm most familiar with.
Okay. Just, um, clarifying, um, Shean, you said
that the, I must have misheard you.
You said there's 8% that have delivery issues.
Must have you meaning like pointer number about eight. Yeah.
Eight, eight individual issues
that would make sense for the red.
Okay. Cool. Got,
Um, um, I'm interested in the OnTrack part
of the reporting.
Um, I'm just wondering if, um,
a way to measure, say out of what's on track,
'cause OnTrack could be a multiple different things
with different, um, redress item.
Um, how many would say,
or what percentage would be complete in the next 12 months,
but what is an increase of completed?
Um,
So it's, it's a good question
because it's actually something which, which, um,
we really have to look at how that, that these are framed.
So, um, the, all of those on track commitments,
some on track is the goal
because they're the intuitive referred.
We have a whole range of enduring commitments.
So on track means we've done the task we need to do now,
and we've prepared to do the tasks
that will come up in the future.
For example, our relationship redress, one
of the fundamentals of that is that we have an annual hui.
Yeah. So on track means we've either got our annual booked
in planned and we will have another one.
So some are not looking for a completion.
And then there's the transactional,
the transactional commitments that we are,
you know, that are on a track.
We, you know, our plan is, is too complete
and would have to come back with you kind of for a
Break. So that way,
um, if it's presented like this,
it's never gonna be complete. That's
Right. So
National should it shouldn't that be counted
as complete and ongoing?
So we rather than on track,
These are, these are things that we probably need to,
when, when, you know, as TPK do their ongoing development
of TE hire and how they measure
and monitor, these are the discussions
that we, that we need to have with them.
Mm. Um, you know,
because there are commitments, again,
so the overlay classifications, um, you know,
that we have an obligations to consult
whenever we undertake certain activities.
So that's, that's on track as long as we are doing that. So,
So if you had a retest mechanism to transfer, um, seen a
or scientific reserve and like there's an end point to Yes.
Yes. Whereas some of the mechanisms are ongoing.
That's right. That's right. On track.
I think that's a very good point. It's almost like what's
transactional isn't, you know, this
that has been done. That
To me that would be more valuable, um,
give a more valuable picture what's actually happening.
But I, I'm hearing Yeah.
Maybe there's issues around the,
um, database itself.
Well, I mean, it, it fulfills a purpose.
I think we are probably a little bit unique in our situation
as well, but it's there, there's certainly, um, a role
for us to have that understanding
and to know those that nuance, I suppose.
Yeah. I think it's a really good point that Adrian, uh,
points to you and for us in a way we are sort
of like a, a monitor Yeah.
Of, of what it is and to see what we can do as a committee
to affect a better outcomes.
Uh, but I suppose it is easily,
you could crudely read this here
that green is still not actually completed.
That's right. So it's still not, but in fact,
the point is no, we're actually meeting your obligations.
Mm-hmm. It's, it's, I think it's perhaps a work on Yep.
That for an entity like us is that we're very clear about
where your challenges are Yeah.
And where your challenges are not.
So it's to be able to recognize
and acknowledge that you've done a significant amount
of great work in a full on song,
but there are these areas here
that we're not quite on, on top of it.
Mm-hmm. We want to know that mm-hmm.
Because we have an ability to go
and affect some other discussions
and hopefully some potential change
to affect a different outcome.
Mm-hmm. So yeah, maybe that's a learning Mm.
For actually how we're presenting some stuff is
how we can divide that out, uh, from it.
And so those relationship things, those things
that are ongoing that never get to a completed status,
it's a forever type of situation, almost needs
to be divided out from the areas that we are wanting
to focus on with the consumers. Yeah. Yeah.
So a subcategory De Yeah.
Um, thank you. Uh, it seems a little trite
to talk about the 0.2% without, um, delivered,
but, um, anyway,
because it is 0.2%, so it's a pretty good, um, you know,
a very good result, I think.
But I, I noted you said that those were not waiting
for DOC or were not as a result of doc, it's a mix.
So I just wanted to understand that a bit better.
Yeah, yeah. We've got a couple of examples Yeah.
That we could talk to. So of those, the eight, um,
they relate to, well, there are two which are review
of a relationship agreement.
And, um, so those two groups,
we've actually been working closely with them
to develop a conservation management strategy,
which is another commitment.
And that's kind of taken up our time.
And what they've said to us, um, recently all this year is
what they'd like us to focus on is actually
implementing the relationship agreement.
Um, so that, I mean, it's,
so we have a delivery issue mm-hmm.
Because we are not, we don't have a plan for review,
but, so that remains, but
that is right now not the, not our pathway. And then you
Okay. Great.
Well, what I'm, I guess my,
my follow up question from that was
how long have these been delivery issues for,
for these ones?
Or how long are some of,
because what, the bit that I don't get from this is
how long some of these have been on track
or yet to be triggered or whatever.
So we don't actually see a timeframe in there.
And I think that's possibly something that's, you know,
it's all very well to say, well, you, they're all on track,
but they might have been on track for two years
and we can't actually see that part of the picture.
So I think that's a, perhaps a something for feedback. Yes.
'cause it's a very, it's a critical point.
And so it's, this is, you know, we,
we've taken this on board as well out the OAG report
and as part of the monitoring work that we've been kind
of developing since then, um, our new framework,
which we're just implementing now, actually has a provision
for identifying emerging risks.
So where, where items are on track. Mm-hmm.
But there's the potential for, you know,
like they're heading into the amber, you know, and then red.
So that's a part of framework that we put.
That's another thing to note is this,
we pulled this together out of our, uh, your dashboard.
It's a, it's an, it's an application that, that enables you
to capture information now mm-hmm.
On different databases. And, um, so it's, it's kind of just
to capture Yes, sure.
In a summary level. Oh, I, I see that there's a layer
of information that we do have,
keep track of some of that other stuff. Yes.
Can I That's the Sorry, Peter car. Sorry. Oh,
But to, to the other question
like's it is a great example.
Like we, you know, the settlement happened in
2013, I think.
And so we've been putting a lot
of effort into the relationship
and, um, the, the focus has been on the cons.
The conservation management strategy is who has said,
and that's also, you know, kind of by agreement, you know,
the what, what the, the information we got from the three
of the five iwi that sort
of the most active in the collective space was,
that was the key document for them to focus on.
Like, that hasn't held us back from having a very
constructive set of relationships, um,
with the individual iwi up there.
Like I was, I was up there recently for another bit of work
and you know, the, I met, I've met with the individual
chief executives of the four of the iwi that are sort
of part of that collective.
And they were, you know,
without putting words in their mouth, you know,
broadly positive about the level of engagement they get out
of our, our people up there.
So it's, um, yeah.
So the, as who he said, you know, it's,
it is a question about now getting, having got the, um,
conservation management strategy sorted, which is awesome.
It's like the first time we've been able
to co-author a conservation management strategy mm-hmm.
With a collection of iwi.
Um, we can move into the other forms
of redress which sit within
their overall settlement packages, which is,
which is quite a, a layered, sophisticated piece
of, um, redress.
Mm-hmm.
Tata is obviously an evolving tool
and an important part that it's evolving too,
is actually having the other party that's important,
this relationship and that is the PTCs and,
and where they feel how things are.
So, you know, you've got green hair with,
you think everything's good and it's, it's ongoing
and satisfactory,
but I think it's important for us
to have visibility also Yes.
Of the other, uh, other partner. Yeah.
And, and how they're feeling things.
So that's potentially another evolution, uh,
that I think would be helpful for us all, uh, to know
where things, uh, sitting
And, and we would think that's fair.
Uh, we have put, uh, a lot of effort, uh,
recently into the relationship with, uh,
and we can speak to that.
Yes. That's helpful. Yeah.
Well it is one of the ones that
Possibly Quite tricky for a while. Indeed. I
Just Question, I just, um, no, we, we um,
we jumped into questions.
Oh, yes. And you are only about a third of the way from,
would it be helpful, it be helpful for you
to finish and then come?
Or does it not make any different?
Ah, I mean we, were only going to go through the,
the key aspects.
I dunno that it
so sensible.
Will you, we wanna get to the good stuff.
I mean, we are happy to, uh, align with committee
The remainder of your presentation
you wanna point out at this time. How's that?
Uh, we, we were going, I think we were just going
to cover some of the key points about we have burned a lot
and I think we've done some really good work
in the last couple of years.
We've still got a long way to go.
Uh, and so we are also open to think continually improving,
putting stronger systems
and processes in place in DOC so that we can be assured,
uh, and I think we can give assurance to PSGs, uh,
that we are doing the things
that we said we were going to do. How
About, how about you spend a little bit of time on,
on a couple of those, uh, key learnings
that you've had on this journey?
So, 'cause we're trying to gather this information, inform
to see how we can help others out to do better as well.
And I think is a good example of that
because it's quite a complicated and new course
Time. That's right.
And so, um, we, we have had,
we had a hard time adjusting
to the new arrangements under settlement.
I think that, um, so the, you know, what is fabulous
that we now have tutor it as an independent entity.
Yeah. That's hard for a government agency to get its head
around when it has to ch completely shift how it relates
to land, you know, rather than being the, the owner
and the administrator to now having a relationship.
And so we, you know, we just have put our hands up
and say, we, we didn't initially do a good job
of changing the way we thought and the way we approached
and accepting the role of the board as now representing Tutu
and as, um, you know, the role of Tua, you know, to ensure
that that TUI had that connection with the land, which was,
you know, part of the, the
fundamental intent of that settlement.
But, you know, so along the way we, you know, we've,
we've had to, we've had a radical shift, a radical shift,
and we now really, really see the, the value, you know,
the value for, for all of us and,
and conservation in being able to allow others to say
what conservation looks like, you know, hit the land,
the land itself as received by the board, you know,
like determines what, what the priorities
are and what we should do.
And that we, you know, bring all
of the expertise at the Department of Conservation
to support, to support, um, UA
and, um, the board, you know, as
and when, as and when they need it. Yeah.
Yeah. Steve, did you Have a question? Mm,
Yeah. It's sort of coming
at it from a biodiversity perspective.
Um, if the objective of department
of Conservation is thriving nature
and healthy biodiversity, we often talk about that third
of the land area being and being dock land.
But that includes the most,
the lowest value conservation estate.
'cause it includes the tops of mountains
and, you know, the, the least farm will land.
Yeah. Right. We've got 7% of our low land rainforest there.
'cause most of it's been cleared already.
Um, I'm wondering at the, the relationship
between the land that is returned in settlement
and the maintainers
and support of iwi in, um, how they want
to achieve conservation outcomes, which is Right,
is appropriate that it should be that way.
How does that work for the Department of Conservation?
How do you interact, um, in a way
to practically support, um, upholding
and improving biodiversity outcomes in that settlement plan?
So it starts at the negotiation phase, which is
what Peter's team undo when we are, you know, like we,
we look in the area and we look at
what the public conservation land in that area looks like.
And then we are saying, you know, what's important to you
and what are your aspirations in this space?
And I think that's kind of the starting point in terms of,
you know, like the, the decisions around what land
to transfer Yeah.
And then what, what people would see in the future. Yeah.
I mean, it, it is very much a, a place by place.
What's the right solution? Uh, there is, yeah.
And there is a sort of a, well, not a formula per se,
but there is a, a conversation about, um, the, the degree
to which there are, um,
but biodiversity in particular, um, outcomes
that the department is keen to maintain or support.
Support and,
and where that's the case, if it has very high levels
of values that the department will often negotiate an
ongoing responsibility and operationally for those areas.
Um, o otherwise, uh, it, it depends, you know,
like about the scale of what happens.
Like, so we have, we have redress, which is very small
and discreet, and so they're just quite small packages,
you know, the, they, they might be five or 10 hectares.
And so the, you know, the level of work that we do there is,
you know, usually part
of a much broader operational plan anyway.
So there's nothing particular, um, there's also,
which has just gone through where we,
we have joint management arrangements over a wider area.
So in fact, the Iwi are participating in exactly those
questions about, given the resources the department has
available to do the work in that place.
You know, where, where should we be putting our effort?
And, um, you know, I think that this is, um, like
without wanting to put the owners on Iwi for, you know,
unreasonably or unreasonably doing that, you know,
so expecting them to do something
that we wouldn't have been doing ourselves.
We do have some amazing examples through settlement
where Iwi have really, you know, stepped up
and stepped in to taking on a much greater responsibility
o on, uh, a, a place that they now have a, a more formal act
of responsibility for.
Um, so I was privileged to get out to Carpentry Island
recently, and Ran is doing, you know, amazing work out there
where it's, you know, we've got an existing dock, uh,
investment in the place,
and alongside that, the Iwi, it's,
it's got its own Ranger on the island.
They've got their own work supporting that person.
And yeah, it's, and it's incredible what,
what's been able to be achieved through that.
Yeah. But it's a really good question
and to is, you know, that that's always been a, you know,
it is a point of tension about, you know, how much money
does the department spend in some of these places already?
So what could we make available for trying
to support the aspirations of the Iwi that who are now got,
you know, that more formal role as well.
But, you know, we just
First follow up on that. Is
it, is it clear what happens
to the financial investment in somewhere like Toyota,
where prior to settlement
and how it continues after settlement?
So Toyota, yes. Yeah.
Like there is a very formal arrangement around an Operation,
annual operation plan that has a set budget and Yeah.
And this, is that, is that consistent across the board
or is that, is that particular to that
That was particular to that?
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if you look at tki Monga,
the recent settlement there, um, the arrangement is
that while the, you know, it becomes, its an legal entity
and there is a joint, uh, governance arrangement over it.
Doc, doc retains operational
responsibility across the moment.
So in that sense, there's no, yeah,
that's, that's the other model.
So we tend not to, settlement register tends not to include
amounts from the Crown for the purposes of management
of land at, at, at, you know, whatever.
We make a, an amount available through the, um,
financial side of it
and how the Iwi chooses to apply
that money as their vehicle. Okay. Prima,
Thank you. And, um,
Sheridan, welcome to the role.
Uh, just, um, taking a few steps back, if you don't mind.
Um, before my colleague Steve Abel's question,
you made a comment that, um,
the last two years in particular, uh, there's been, uh, uh,
a good effort with respect to installing certain, um,
different systems in place.
Um, so that, that how I understood it.
So the vision of, of achieving this is on track.
Um, can you give an example of, of some of these systemic
changes, um, you've maybe made or, or,
or, uh, in the, in the way of making,
I just need to a couple of them.
And so, so one, this might be a little bit high level,
but one is, uh, that
dot being an honorable Treaty partner is a
central pillar of our strategy.
Uh, and you might, we've I think, released
that in July this year.
Uh, but that's an enduring, uh,
aspiration for us.
And so what it will provide is that we can make sure
that we are monitoring, uh,
and our performance is, uh, ensuring
we're making movement towards that.
Uh, Hoya spoke earlier to the monitoring, uh,
and the dashboards that we've put in place.
Uh, and Peter could speak further to an end-to-end project
that we have commenced.
Uh, so that from negotiations through to implementation
and monitoring, we've got a whole of department view.
Um, and we have a governance group
as well across the department that sees all of the things.
Can I, um, interrupt please. Yeah.
So with that, um, governance, um, team, how long has
that been in place formally and how many people are on it?
Uh, it predates you, but it predates me.
It's, it's been certainly,
so I joined the department scope two years ago,
and it was, it was in place then.
And since the, the work we've been doing
around the end-to-end entry SEAL system, it's got a,
it's got a sharper focus
and it's also now sort of supporting the,
that work alongside the broader work program of the minister
of the department in respect
of the Honorable Treaty partner, um, work.
Mm-hmm. So, and it's got, it was convened co co-chaired
by two DDGs, in fact, our predecessors,
and it had representation from, uh, across the department,
so regional operations.
Um, so that's our, you know, local people.
It had two, if not three regional directors.
It had, I was on a, my substantive role,
It's about 10, It was about across
The department.
So anybody who touches particularly, um,
settlement work was re represented on that committee.
Right. Uh, Dana,
Did you have a question? Yeah.
Um, no,
I think I probably answered it, uh, a little bit.
Um, but, but I think one
of the things I was interested in is, um, what
cultural changes within the department have you been?
Um, so if you, if you look back at, for, if you take
that example, right, and the, and the way that was handled,
and we frankly all agree it wasn't great.
Um, what cultural changes in terms of training
and development, um, understanding
and preparation for, um, the kind of handover
that was required for two weeks
and two two, um, have you done within the department?
I mean, it might be hard to answer 'cause it was 10 years
ago, but, oh, probably longer now, 11 maybe.
Um, but, you know, uh, what learnings have you taken from it
to develop a better way of handling those?
So it's because it's all, sorry, just, just to add to that,
it's all very, it's great sitting in Wellington
and saying, oh, we've done this,
and, um, we've got all these plans,
but actually the people on the front frontline
who are deeply connected to that job, who work in interior
for take that example day in and day out,
and then all of a sudden have to extract themselves, um,
that mean that was
Part of the issue. I was, I'm
Sure, but yeah. I'm just interested
In your, in your view.
Yeah. Um, and, and,
and I think what I reflect on immediately is that it's,
you know, treaty settlements have grown
and grown numbers over time.
And so in the early days, they were particular regions
where they had a settlement and others didn't.
And so it just wasn't top of mind. Mm-hmm.
You know, for lots of our colleagues mm-hmm.
For, you know, our lp.
But then as you come into the world
where most regions will have a settlement, you know,
it becomes a, a go-to question for people as they,
as they're doing, as they're doing their work.
Um, and to, and I think that,
and what that has seen is a corresponding, um,
change in what Peter's team doing.
So from the negotiations to the handover
to the implementation,
and really looking at the way in which we share information
and bring the teams in to under, that's what,
which general said, right.
Understanding what the redress is.
Um, and, and for us, what we really had
to develop is not being reliant on single people.
You know, like, like, like, um, because people come go
and these things are long, long term in the making
and then in, in the implementation.
So it's trying, we what, I mean,
it's, this is a work of progress.
You know, we, we, I don't wanna sound complacent, like,
like we are, we are having to keep on trying
to up our game. Um,
We, we also do have a formal plan, uh, so
that they still currently exist in the Public Service Act.
Uh, and, uh, so there are some areas that we have to, um,
legislatively comply with.
So, uh,
and strengthening that across, uh, the department tga,
uh, we have run for 25 years, uh, local.
Uh, and so they are at place, uh, they're part
of our induction program where
people are inducted into the department,
but learn about, uh, where they are.
So the cultural, her stories and narratives, uh,
and that's certainly gone a long way
to improving our capability and at place.
Mm-hmm. We also have six
or seven Poo, uh, across the MuTu, uh,
so located at place to facilitate, uh,
relationships with pgs and Iwi and Hapu.
So how many did you say? 26. Six or seven. Wow.
Across the country. And 25 1 hour as well, did you say?
Oh, no, sorry. It's been going for 25 years. 25
Years, But we only, uh, operate between four
and six a year.
Oh, total four. Okay. Yeah. Yep.
And, sorry, can I just ask
a follow up question down there?
Sorry, I was, where I was gonna go was around the flying,
uh, uh, so the, the, so these one I know,
can you just talk me through what, like how long they are?
I think I've got an idea of what you're doing them,
which is stunning, but how long do they run for and,
and like what sort of percent, what percentage
of the total doc workforce is being exposed to these
and is it an ongoing thing
or just a one off in terms of their induction?
A couple of those I might have to come back to you on.
Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, um, so it's a one week, um,
Quas, uh, run at local Manai.
So NoHo or Yes. In
Yeah, that's right. That's
right. And it's kind of depending on the size
of the manai, the number of, um, you know, people
who are able to go and, um, I'm about to make up a number
so I better off Yeah, that's,
It's just A one off do during induction,
Is it? That's
one part of the induction
and it is an expectation that newbies,
uh, participate in it.
And so myself, I will be attending one, uh, in October.
Okay. Uh, so, and I think that's important.
I think that all of our leaders
and senior leaders should be participating.
So that's, uh, called, uh, uh,
and it's, yeah, I think it's really important
that it's run at place
and you learn local narratives and cultural history.
Yeah. But 25 years. Awesome. Yeah. Cool. Thank
You. Coming close
to the, uh, the end of our time,
but, um, just, um, I think, uh,
there is risk here that the lack of performance
and potential, potentially some other Crown entities can
actually cross-contaminate the relationship that you have.
You know, the frustration that you might have
with the important at place
relationship can be affected by it.
Um, and, you know, we, we as a committee are endeavoring to
contribute to the change, um, of getting better outcomes
with, with meeting our treaty settlements as the crown.
Um, this is gonna be a
strange question 'cause I'm asking around the other way.
I'm asking of you, uh, what areas do you think
that we should be focusing on marking, uh,
as a select committee and the lever that we can build
and what we can do that you believe can actually help the,
the grand scale things of, of what this is?
It's, it's a bit of a, it's not a,
it's not a specific department sort of a question,
but it's, it's your opportunity.
Give us your thoughts from what you've seen.
'cause you've been working in this day in, day out,
and when you grab snippets of it
and it's just good to just get something, a bit
of reality for us as well.
So feel free,
Peter, probably.
So it is in the presentation
and it is genuine, you know, like the, the whole, um,
I mean it's, it's great having the OAG come in
and do this across the system, you know, it, it's stuff
that we don't see otherwise as an individual department.
So I, I'm, I was quite interested in where they, you know,
got to around their findings around, um, the questions
of the holistic intent of settlements.
I think that's a great thing to, to keep focused on,
and particularly about how we all work across the system
as individual agencies.
And the opportunity exactly your point, I think, you know,
which is, um, how can we better coordinate engagement?
How can we make our progress with our settlement redress
that we have to com implement with an individual we,
we more visible to our colleagues
and other agencies and vice versa.
You know, how can we manage that pressure on Iwi?
You know, that's my experience.
That's one of the, the, the, you know,
among many other challenges for Iwi that we work with
or PSGs that we work with is just, you know, having
to set up where you do, you know, I remember, you know,
doing the Nazi ment too and,
and watching the progress with NPA as, as they got through
that work, you know, that it, it's huge challenges to them.
So understanding how we can dock into their set
of priorities and mm-hmm.
And, you know, do that in a reasonable timeframe
and as a collective of the crown, I think.
Okay. Alright. Any last questions, comments from anybody?
Well, just as, as a little bit of a wrap up, um, you,
you've, you know, we know that the Department
of Conservation has the biggest workload that be put away
with the number of commitments
through all the treat settlements
and that it, it's, you know, demonstrated here in the report
and it's, um, I think it's encouraging to see the,
the successes you've had,
although, you know, that you've got some areas, some work on
itself, but I think, uh, by
and large, when you look at it as a percentage, a crude way
of looking at it, um, it, it looks reasonably good in
that I am mindful, uh, that this is, uh, your story
and what you're presenting to us.
And I'm always mindful of what is the Yeah, indeed.
What do they think? That's why I saying
that's really important I think for us as a committee
to understand how Iwi thinks as well, to measure that upon
what we you perceive it, uh, itself.
But all in all, um, you know, on my behalf,
we dunno whether they can speak on everybody else here,
but I think you're doing a pretty good job of, uh, what,
you know, what we expect from the Crown entities.
What what we're trying to do is meet the, the commitments
that we signed up to in law with these things.
And, and there are areas, um,
within the crown that we are struggling.
Um, but by and large,
I think you guys are doing a pretty good job on the face
of it and, and I appreciate that.
We just wanna keep getting better.
I think we can, uh, I think achieve the intent and,
and it's not without its tensions.
Yeah. I think in the relationship.
And how do we, coming back to your comment about, uh,
how does the department
and parts of the crown, I think start to shift
to support the realization of iwi
and hapu aspirations and the holistic intent of settlements.
I think that remains a, a challenge
for the department in the, in the system.
And I said you had a challenge, uh,
obviously on an annual basis, we get the opportunity
to be in front of you along with the minister.
Um, but if, if you could work on the presentation of
what Adrian was pointing at.
Yes. Yeah. So to really sort of nail
what is actually the problem areas here versus what's on
track, I think that will be helpful for us to do our job,
uh, to focus in on, on the important matters at stake.
Okay. Other than that Kia coach, thank you very much.